---
layout: post
title: n00bzunit3d 2024 misc/addition
date: 2024-08-05 
description: Writeup for misc/addition in n00bzunit3d 2024
tags: n00bzunit3d2024
categories: writeup
---
Welcome to my series of writeups for n00bzunit3d 2024 capture-the-flag competition. In this post, we look at the `misc/addition` challenge. First, let's look at the challenge. The challenge runs on a server and requires to connect remotely to access the challenge. The server code is provided and is given below.


{% highlight python linenos %}

import time
import random

questions = int(input("how many questions do you want to answer? "))

for i in range(questions):
    a = random.randint(0, 10)
    b = random.randint(0, 10)

    yourans = int(input("what is " + str(a) + ' + ' + str(b) + ' = '))

    print("calculating")

    totaltime = pow(2, i)

    print('.')
    time.sleep(totaltime / 3)
    print('.')
    time.sleep(totaltime / 3)
    print('.')
    time.sleep(totaltime / 3)

    if yourans != a + b:
        print("You made my little brother cry 😭")
        exit(69)

f = open('/flag.txt', 'r')
flag = f.read()
print(flag[:questions])

{% endhighlight %}

The challenge asks the number of questions `n` the user wants to solve and then asks `n` addition question. Between each question, the program sleeps for `2^i` second after answering the  `ith` question and returns the first `n` characters of the flag at the end after answering all questions correctly. Getting a the flag the conventional way would take hours (if not days) depending on the length of the flag. We need to figure out a way around it.

We see that the program loops in `range(questions)` where `questions` is the number of questions we wish to answer. Since `range(n)` iterates only from 0 to `n-1`, giving a negative number will completely skip over the loop and directly gives us the flag.

```
how many questions do you want to answer?
Sending input: -1    
  p.sendline(f'{num}')
n00bz{REDACTED}
```